# FR3D Python

[FR3D](https://www.bgsu.edu/research/rna/software/fr3d.html) stands for "Find RNA 3D" and is commonly pronounced "Fred". FR3D enables searching and annotating RNA 3D structures and supports the [mmCIF](https://mmcif.wwpdb.org) format.

Originally [written in Matlab](https://github.com/BGSU-RNA/FR3D), this repository is a re-implementation of FR3D in Python. FR3D and FR3D Python are developed by the [BGSU RNA Bioinformatics group](http://rna.bgsu.edu).

## Quick start using Docker

Get started with FR3D using containers with [Docker](https://www.docker.com), [Podman](https://podman.io), or [Singularity](https://sylabs.io/guides/latest/user-guide/introduction.html).

1. Get a Docker image

    ```
    docker pull ghcr.io/bgsu-rna/fr3d-python
    # tag the image with a shorter name for convenience
    docker tag ghcr.io/bgsu-rna/fr3d-python fr3d-python
    ```

    Alternatively, clone the repo and build locally:

    ```
    git clone https://github.com/BGSU-RNA/fr3d-python
    docker build -t fr3d-python .
    ```

    <details>
      <summary>Notes for M1 Mac users</summary>      

      To build a Docker image on M1 Macs use [docker buildx](https://docs.docker.com/buildx/working-with-buildx/) to specify the target platform in order to be able to install all the dependencies:

      ```bash
      docker buildx install
      docker buildx build -t fr3d-python --platform linux/amd64 .
      ```
    </details>

2. Annotate RNA 3D structures with basepair interactions

    ```
    docker run -v <path_to_input>:/rna/input -v <path_to_output>:/rna/output fr3d-python python fr3d/classifiers/NA_pairwise_interactions.py -i /rna/input -o /rna/output <pdb_id>
    ```

    where

    - `path_to_input` is the folder where cif files are stored (if a file does not exist already it will downloaded)
    - `path_to_output` is the folder where the results will be generated
    - `pdb_id` is the PDB identifier of the structure to be annotated (for example, `1S72`). Multiple PDB identifiers can be specified
    - Optional flag determines which output files are generated
      - `-c basepair` outputs a file listing basepairs in the 12 Leontis-Westhof families
      - `-c basepair_detail` outputs Leontis-Westhof pairs with more detail about asymmetric pairs and with bifurcated and alternative pairs
      - `-c sO` outputs a file with base-oxygen stacking annotations
      - `-c basepair,cO` outputs both basepair and sO annotation files; don't put spaces between the category types

<details>
  <summary>Notes on updating Docker image in Container registry</summary>

  The Docker images are hosted on the GitHub Container registry. Currently the images need to be updated manually as follows:

  1. [Authenticate](https://docs.github.com/en/packages/working-with-a-github-packages-registry/working-with-the-container-registry) using Personal Access Token (required only once)

  2. Create and push a new image

      ```
      docker build -t ghcr.io/bgsu-rna/fr3d-python .
      docker push ghcr.io/bgsu-rna/fr3d-python
      ```

  In the future this should be done automatically with GitHub Actions.
</details>

### Understanding the output

Note that as of April 2022, NA_pairwise_interactions.py outputs annotations of RNA basepairs, including basepairs made by some modified nucleotides, but this is in a test phase, and not all basepairs are being annotated.
Work to refine the basepair annotations will continue in Summer 2022.

The program `NA_pairwise_interactions.py` generates tab-separated files called `<pdb_id>_basepairs.txt` that list basepair interactions between pairs of nucleotides (an RNA 3D structure can contain 0 or more basepairs). The files contain the following fields:

- Unit ID of the first nucleotide in the [Unit ID format](https://www.bgsu.edu/research/rna/help/rna-3d-hub-help/unit-ids.html)
- basepair interaction between the first and second nucleotides, defined according to the [Leontis-Westhof nomenclature](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1370104/)
- Unit ID of the second nucleotide
- number of interactions crossed by the basepair (0 for nested basepairs or an integer for non-nested basepairs)

For example:

```
1S72|1|0|A|1193	tSH	1S72|1|0|U|1205	0
1S72|1|0|A|631	tSH	1S72|1|0|U|2607	25
```

## Installation without Docker

### Clone FR3D Python

```
git clone https://github.com/BGSU-RNA/fr3d-python
cd fr3d-python
python setup.py install
```

:warning: Any time files such as `fr3d/cif/reader.py` get edited, you need to rerun the `python setup.py install` command.

### Set up on Python 2.7

**fr3d-python requires PDBx**. Follow [instructions at wwPDB](https://mmcif.wwpdb.org/docs/sw-examples/python/html/) to install PDBx on your local machine and place in your Python path.

### Set up on Python 3.x

In order to use FR3D in Python 3, you will need to install the [mmcif-pdbx](https://pypi.org/project/mmcif-pdbx/) package:

```
pip install mmcif-pdbx
```

This will put the PDBx package in your Python path.

<details>
  <summary>Solving TypeError when reading .cif files</summary>

On Windows, mmcif-pdbx can experience a TypeError when loading .cif files.  This is apparently because your machine expects the iterator loop to deal with bytes.  Try this: find where mmcif-pdbx is installed using ```pip show mmcif-pdbx```.  Edit C:\[python-path]\Lib\site-packages\pdbx\reader.py  At lines 387 and 397, after ```for line in file_iterator:``` add a line ``` line = line.decode() ```.
</details>

<details>
  <summary>Note for Windows users about case-sensitive filenames</summary>

FR3D Python uses case-sensitive file names because chain identifiers in PDB are case sensitive. Windows looks like it uses case sensitive filenames, but if you create a file called `Data.txt` and then save another file in the same place called `data.txt`, it will overwrite `Data.txt` and it will be listed as `Data.txt` because that was there first. Recent versions of Windows allow for case sensitivity.

For FR3D Python, you need to enable case sensitivity in filenames in the ```units``` folder. See https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/windows/wsl/case-sensitivity to read about how to enable case sensitivity for a specific directory.

The key steps seem to be:
	- `Enable-WindowsOptionalFeature -Online -FeatureName Microsoft-Windows-Subsystem-Linux`
	- `fsutil.exe file setCaseSensitiveInfo <path to folder> enable`

Note that the first step is not mentioned in the Microsoft documentation.
</details>

## Running FR3D Python

Navigate to the [classifiers](https://github.com/BGSU-RNA/fr3d-python/tree/master/fr3d/classifiers) folder and run the following command to ensure that the installation was successful:

```
python NA_pairwise_interactions.py --help
```

You can update [localpath.py](https://github.com/BGSU-RNA/fr3d-python/blob/master/fr3d/localpath.py) to represent your file structure. Alternatively, use the `--input` (`-i`) and `--output` (`-o`) flags to specify the location of your input cif files and the output text files.

For example, if you already have the .cif file downloaded, use the `--input` flag to specify the directory your cif file is in:

```
python NA_pairwise_interactions.py --input <path_to_input> <pdb_id>
```

Additionally, if you don't have the cif file in your localpath, you can run

```
python NA_pairwise_interactions.py <pdb_id>.cif
```

and this will download the file for processing and run the program.

Output can be specified using the `-o` or `--output` tags, for example:

```
python NA_pairwise_interactions.py --output <path_to_output> <pdb_id>
```

This will write where you wish to output your annotations. If the specified directory doesn't exist, one will be made.

### Install Fr3d-Python
You can now install fr3d-python from the command line using pip. (Only on testPyPI right now. Waiting on license and a few other things)

`pip install fr3d`

In order to use fr3d-python without specifying input and output paths every time you run, you can create a file called config.py that specifies which directories input and output should be ran. 

Below is an outline of how we recommended to setup your config.py file and local file structure to use FR3D-Python.
```
config = {}
config['3d_structure_file_path'] = 'C:\\Users\\User\\...\\FR3D\\PDBFiles\\' 
config['annotation_text_path'] = 'C:\\Users\\User\\...\\FR3D\\NAPairwiseInteractions\\'
config['unit_data_binary_path'] = 'C:\\Users\\User\\...\\FR3D\\Python FR3D\\data\\units\\' 
config['unit_annotation_binary_path'] = 'C:\\Users\\User\\...\\FR3D\\Python FR3D\\data\\units\\'
config['pairwise_annotation_binary_path'] = 'C:\\Users\\User\\...\\FR3D\\Python FR3D\\data\\pairs\\'
config['fr3d_search_html_path'] = 'C:\\Users\\User\\...\\FR3D\\fr3d_search_html_pages\\' #HTML documents
config['diagnostic_html_path'] = 'C:\\Users\\User\\...\\FR3D\\html_pages\\' #HTML documents
```

Note that the above config is representative of a Windows system but this can be changed to represent a Mac system.

```
FR3D
|  
└─── config.py 
│
└───3DStructureFiles
|   |    
|   └─── Where .cif or .pdb Files will be stored or downloaded to 
└───AnnotationTextOutput
|   │  
|   └───Text
|   |   |
|   |   └─── Where .txt files of annotations will be output 
|   |
|   └───Binary
|   |   |
|   |   └─── Where binary files or .pickle files will be output 
└───PythonFR3D
|   |
|   └───data
|       |
|       └───pairs
|
└───FR3DSearchHTMLPages
|
└───DiagnosticHTMLPages
```

If you have installed fr3d-python and have navigated to the folder where config.py is, you can use the following commands: 

- `NA_Pairwise_Interactions <3D Structure File Name>` - Will run the program NA_Pairwise_Interactions.py on the specified 3D Structure files. 
    - Optional Flags:
        - `-c` or `--category`: category. 
            - By default, not specifying -c will annotate basepairs only. 
            - Use ```NA_Pairwise_Interactions -c basepair``` to annotate basepairs
            - Use `NA_Pairwise_Interactions -c stacking` to annotate base-base stacking interactions (Still preliminary)
            - Use `NA_Pairwise_Interactions -c backbone` to annotate base-ribose and base-phosphate interactions (Still Preliminary)
            - Use `NA_Pairwise_Interactions <3D Structure File Name> -c sO` to annotate base-oxygen-stacking interactions.
            - Use `NA_Pairwise_Interactions <3D Structure File Name> -c coplanar` to annotate coplanar interactions(?).
            - Use `NA_Pairwise_Interactions <3D Structure File Name> -c basepair_detail` to annotate basepair_detail interactions(?).
            - Use `NA_Pairwise_Interactions <3D Structure File Name> -c covalent` to annotate covalent bonds(?).
        - `-f` or `--format`
            - By default, output will be a .txt file.
            -  Use `NA_Pairwise_Interactions <3D Structure File Name> -f txt` to specify .txt file as output
            -  Use `NA_Pairwise_Interactions <3D Structure File Name> -f ebi_json` to specify json as output.

`NA_Protein_Annotation <3D Stucture File Name>` - Will run the program NA_Protein_Annotation.py on the specified 3D Structure File. 

`NA_Unit_Annotation <3D Stucture File Name> -c <category>` - Will run the program NA_Unit_Annotation.py on the given structure file for the specified category. 

For all of the above scripts, you can use the `--input` (`-i`) and `--output` (`-o`) flags to specify the location of your input 3D Structure files and the output text or binary files.

## Get in touch

If you have any questions or feature requests, feel free to [submit an issue](https://github.com/BGSU-RNA/fr3d-python/issues) or get in touch via a [contact form](https://www.bgsu.edu/research/rna/contact-us.html) on the website of the BGSU RNA Bioinformatics group.
